# SimPrily

Created by Ariella Gladstein, based on code from Consuelo Quinto Cortes and Krishna Veeramah.
Also worked on by David Christy, Logan Gantner, and Mack Skodiak.  
agladstein@email.arizona.edu

## About
SimPrily runs genome simulations with user defined parameters or parameters randomly generated by priors and computes genomic statistics on the simulation output.  
Version 1

1. Run genome simulation with model defined by prior distributions of parameters and demographic model structure.
2. Take into account SNP array ascertainment bias by creating pseudo array based on priors of number of samples of discovery populations and allele frequency cut-off.
3. Calculate genomic summary statistics on simulated genomes and pseudo arrays. 

This is ideal for use with Approximate Bayesian Computation on whole genome or SNP array data.

Uses c++ programs macs and GERMLINE. For more information on these programs, see:  
https://github.com/gchen98/macs  
https://github.com/sgusev/GERMLINE  


## Install

cd to the directory you want to work in,
```bash
git clone https://github.com/agladstein/SimPrily.git
```

## Environment Set up
Python 2.7.6, 2.7.11, or 2.7.13 is required to run the code, with the requirements installed from requirements.txt.
We highly recommend running SimPrily with the Docker image or virtual environment.

### Docker
A Docker Image built with Python 2.7.13, the requirements, and the SimPrily code can be found on Docker Hub 
https://hub.docker.com/r/agladstein/simprily_autobuild/

The Docker image can be pulled with
```
docker pull agladstein/simprily_autobuild
```

### Singularity
A Singularity Image, built from the Docker Image, is used for the Open Science Grid workflow. The Singularity Image is NOT currently publically available through Singularity Hub.

### Virtual environment
The most reliable way to do this is with a virtual environment.

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
sudo apt-get install python-virtualenv git python-dev
sudo easy_install -U distribute
virtualenv simprily_env
source simprily_env/bin/activate
cd SimPrily
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install pip-tools
pip-sync
simprily_env/bin/python simprily.py --help
```
If you get an error during `pip-sync` try rebooting the system. 

#### Virtual Machine for non-Linux

If you are running on a non-Linux OS, we recommend using the virtual machine, Vagrant (can be used on Mac or PC). In order to run Vagrant, you will also need VirtualBox.  
Download Vagrant from https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html  
Download VirtualBox from https://www.virtualbox.org/

```bash
vagrant up
vagrant ssh
``` 

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
sudo apt-get install python-virtualenv git python-dev
sudo easy_install -U distribute
cd ~
virtualenv simprily_env
source ~/simprily_env/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install pip-tools
cd /vagrant
pip-sync
~/simprily_env/bin/python simprily.py --help
```



### Local installation

If the above options do not work, the correct version of Python can also be installed locally:  

```bash
cd mkdir python_prebuild
wget https://www.python.org/ftp/python/2.7.6/Python-2.7.6.tgz
mkdir python
tar -zxvf Python-2.7.6.tgz
cd Python-2.7.6
./configure --prefix=$(pwd)/../python
make
make install
cd ..
export PATH=$(pwd)/python/bin:$PATH
wget https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py
python get-pip.py
pip install -r /home/agladstein/simslg/macsswig_simslg/requirements.txt
python simprily.py --help
```

## Usage

e.g. One simulation (with pseudo array and genetic map):  
```
python simprily.py -p examples/eg1/param_file_eg1_asc.txt -m examples/eg1/model_file_eg1_asc.csv -g genetic_map_b37/genetic_map_GRCh37_chr1.txt.macshs -a array_template/ill_650_test.bed -i 1 -o output_dir -v
```

e.g. One simulation (genetic map, no pseudo array):  
```
python simprily.py -p examples/eg1/param_file_eg1.txt -m examples/eg1/model_file_eg1.csv -g genetic_map_b37/genetic_map_GRCh37_chr1.txt.macshs -i 1 -o output_dir -v
```

For quick help:
```
python simprily.py --help
```

#### Input  
`simprily.py` takes 4 required arguments and 2 optional arguments, and help, verbose, and profile options.   

Run as  
```
python simprily.py [-h] -p PARAM -m MODEL -i ID -o OUT [-g MAP] [-a ARRAY] [-v] [--profile]
```
##### Required 
`-p PARAM` or `--param PARAM` = The location of the parameter file  
`-m MODEL` or `--model MODEL` = The location of the model file  
`-i ID` or `--id ID` = The unique identifier of the job  
`-o OUT` or `--out OUT` = The location of the output directory  
 
##### Optional
`-h` or `--help` = shows a help message and exists  
`-v` = increase output verbosity. This includes 3 levels, `-v`, `-vv`, and `-vvv`  
`--profile` = Print a log file containing the time in seconds and memory use in Mb for main functions  
`-g MAP` or `--map MAP` = The location of the genetic map file  
`-a ARRAY` or `--array ARRAY` = The location of the array template file, in [bed format](http://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/content/general-usage.html).
The third column is used as the physical positions of the SNP for the pseudo array. 

### Additional information on input arguments

#### jobID
This is a unique identifier for the job. It is used in the names of the output files.
For example, the output file with parameter values and summary statistics is named `results_{jobid}.txt`.

#### output_dir
This is where all the output goes.
Within the output_dir the directory `results` will always be created. The `results` directory contains the results file `results_{jobid}.txt` with the parameter values and summary statistics.  
Additionally, the directories `germline_out` and `sim_data` are also created, but will be empty if the `germline` or `pedmap` arguments in the model file are not included.

*Be careful when running large numbers of jobs (>2000). It is bad practice to run large numbers of jobs and direct all the output to the same directory, because listing the contents of the directory becomes very slow. Instead, we recommend creating directory "buckets". See section Recommendations for other HTC workflows*.

#### param_file.txt
Examples of param_file.txt can be found in examples.
The param_file.txt must define the parameters of the demographic model and the minimum derived allele frequency to be used to create the pseudo array, if a pseudo array is to be created.

All parameter values should be given in pre-coalescent scaled units. 
That is, Ne should be given in units of chromosomes, and time should be given in units of generations.
The code will scale to the appropriate coalescent units for the simulation.

The definition can be hard-coded parameter values, such as:
```text
A = 1000
B = 1000
T1 = 100
```

The definition can be a prior, such as:  
```text
A = (1e3.0:1e4.0)
B = (1e3.0:1e4.0)
T1 = (10:500)
```
Log base 10 can be used for the parameter definitions by using `1eX` or `1Ex`.
This is recommended when using a prior with a very large range (See ABCtoolbox manual).

If pseudo arrays are to be created, the derived allele frequency must be defined. For example,
```text
A = (1e3.0:1e4.0)
B = (1e3.0:1e4.0)
T1 = (10:500)
daf = (0.01:0.1)
```

*currently only a range of values is supported for daf. Therefore if you want to hard code a value, use the same value as the min and max of the prior.*

#### model_file.csv
Examples of model_file.csv can be found in examples.

The demographic model, SNP ascertainment model, and additional options are defined in the model_file.csv.
The demographic model defines events in populations' history, including population divergence, instantanious effective population size changes, exponential growth, gene flow and admixture. We use a coalescent simulation, so models must be defined backwards in time, starting from the present, with each event going back in the past. The SNP ascertainment model defines how to create a pseudo SNP array using a template SNP array, a set of discovery populations and a minor allele frequency cutoff. The SNP ascertainment model should be used when comparing to real SNP array data. 

All instances of any argument must start with a dash followed by the corresponding argument parameters, 
and value(s). 
Each new argument must be a new line.
All variables and values must be separated by commas (white space will be ignored, so it is okay to include spaces).
The model arguments can appear in any order.

All parameters must be called with a name corresponding to its definition in the param file.
This is how parameter values are assigned to the simulation model.
For example,
```text
-macs,./bin/macs,
-length,5000000,
-s,1231414,
-t,2.5e-8,
-r,1e-8,
-h,1e5,
# define a sample size of 50 haploid individuals for populations 1 and 2
-I, 2, 50, 50
# define the effective population size at present for population 1
-n, 1, A
# define the effective population size at present for population 2
-n, 2, B
# define a divergence event (join backwards in time) between populations 1 and 2
-ej, T1, 1, 2
```

##### Setup simulation arguments
One of the following options must be included:   
`-macs_file` - read in static output from MaCS. This should only be used for rigorous testing.  
`-macs` - use the original simulator [MaCS](https://github.com/gchen98/macs). This option will stream the MaCS simulation output directly to be read into a python bitarray. This option is ideal for rigorous testing that requires stable reproducible results.  
`-macsswig` - use the modified version of MaCS, macsswig.

Following the `-macs` and `-macs_file` flags there should be a path to either the executable or static file in relation to the working directory. For example:
```
-macs, ./bin/macs
```
or 
```
-macs_file, tests/test_data/sites1000000.txt
```


`-length`: length  
* how many base pairs you want to simulate

`-s`  
* random seed. 
Must be an integer.  
If no input is given, no seed will be used, and everything will be random.
If a seed is provided, reproducible parameters will be picked from the priors.
Using a seed will also cause reproducible simulations with macs.  
*The seed does not currently work with macsswig*

##### Demographic simulation arguments
All argument flags are based on macs arguments (see macs manual for more detail).  

`-t`  
* mutation rate per site per 4N generations

`-d`  
* enable debugging messages. No entry will default to allowing debugging 
messages. This will not work when using macsswig

`-h`  
* history. Refers to the number of previous base pairs to retain

`-r`: r    
* recombination rate per site per 4N generations

`-c`: f lambda  
* f = ratio of gene conversion rate to crossover rate. track len(lambda) 
is mean length of tract in base pairs.
*This has not been tested.*

`-R`  
* Tab delimited file where first two columns indicate range of base 
pair positions scaled to the unit interval and last column is ratio 
with respect to base line recombination rate.
We provide the HapMap genetic map for each chromosome in genetic_map_b37.

`-T`  
* Print each local tree in Newick format to standard out. *This has not been tested.*

`-G`: alpha 
* Assign growth rate alpha across populations where 
alpha=-log(Np/Nr)
* alpha will accept priors in the format a;b where a is the 
lower value and b is the higher value

`-I`: n n_n  
* Assign all elements of the migration matrix for n populations. 
Values in matrix set to mig_rate/(n-1)
* The length of n_n should be equal to n

`-m`: i,j m
* i, j is associated with a location in the migration matrix
* m is assigned to the value at (i, j)

`-ma`: m_nn
* Assign values to all elements of migration matrix for n populations

`-n`: i size
* Population i set to size

`-g`: i alpha 
* assigns alpha value as explained in -G to population i

`-eG`: t alpha
* t is a time value.
* alpha behaves the same as in -G

`-eg`: t i alpha
* t is a time value. 
* alpha behaves the same as in -G
* i is a population that alpha is assigned to at time t

`-eM`: t m 
* t is a time value. 
* Assign migration rate m to all elements in migration matrix at 
time t 

`-em`: t i,j m_ij
* t is a time value. 
* i and j make up point in a population matrix. 
* assigns migration rate m_ij to the population at i, j at time t 

`-ema`: t n m_nn
* t is a time value. 
* Assign migration rates  within the migration matrix for n 
populations at time t

`-eN`: t size
* t is a time value. 
* Assigns size to all populations at time t

`-en`: t i size_i
* t is a time value. 
* assigns size_i to population i at time t

`-es`: t i p
* t is a time value. 
* splits population i by p at time t

`-ej`: t i j
* t is a time value. 
* joins population i with population j at time t

##### SNP array ascertainment arguments

If the user would like to create a pseudo array from the simulation, the array template must be included in the command line argument with the flag `-a`, and four additional arguments must be included in the model_file:  

`-discovery`, followed by the populations (defined by their numbers from `-n`) that should be used to discover the SNP (e.g. the HapMap populations).
These are the populations that will be used to create the pseudo array.
When calculating summary statistics, summary statistics based on whole genome simulation and pseudo array will be calculated for these populations.    

`-sample`, followed by the populations (defined by their numbers from `-n`) that are the samples of interest for demographic interest.      

`-daf`, followed by the parameter name for daf.  

`-random_discovery`, followed by `True` or `False`. 
True will add a random number of individuals to the discovery populations to use as the "panel" to create the pseudo array.
When this option is False, the total number of simulated discovery populations is equal to the number "genotyped" and in the "panel".  


For example:
```text
-macs,./bin/macs,
-length,5000000,
-s,1231414,
-t,2.5e-8,
-r,1e-8,
-h,1e5,
-I, 2, 50, 50
-n, 1, A
-n, 2, B
-ej, T1, 1, 2
-discovery, 1
-sample, 2
-daf, daf
-random_discovery, True
```


An example of an array template is:  
```text
chr22	0	15929526
chr22	0	15991515
chr22	0	16288162
chr22	0	16926611
chr22	0	16990146
chr22	0	17498992
chr22	0	17540297
chr22	0	17728199
chr22	0	17760714
chr22	0	18180154
chr22	0	18217275
chr22	0	18220413
```


##### Ordering of time-specific events
When using priors, if some demographic events must happen in a certain order, the order can be specified by adding the order number to the argument.
For example say there are two demographic events, a population split and instantaneous growth, but the instantaneous growth must happen before the population split, we can indicate that in the model file:
```text
-en_1, Tgrowth, 1, A2
-ej_2, Tsplit, 2, 1 
```

Additionally, the same format can be used to indicate that multiple events should happen at the same time.
If there are multiple events that should happen at the same time, the word `inst` should be used instead of a time parameter after the first definition of the time.
*(this will actually cause the times to be just different enough that macs is happy.)*  
For example, say we wanted growth to occur at the same time as the population split:
```text
-en_1, Tgrowth, 1, A2
-ej_1, inst, 2, 1 
```
In this case, the population split will technically be simulated slightly after the growth.

##### germline
*currently has a bug*

The option `-germline` can be included in the model_file to use [GERMLINE](https://github.com/sgusev/GERMLINE) to find shared IBD segments between all simulated individuals from pseudo array.
Does not use the genetic map to run GERMLINE.  
Runs GERMLINE as:  
```
bash ./bin/phasing_pipeline/gline.sh ./bin/germline-1-5-1/germline  ped_name map_name out_name "-bits 10 -min_m min_m"
```

If GERMLINE does not run, try rebuilding it on the machine you are trying to run on:
```
cd ./bin/germline-1-5-1
make clean
make
```

##### pedmap

The option `-pedmap` can be included in the model_file to print a ped and map file of the pseudo array data.


## Notes for developers
* If you use import a new Python package make sure you add it to the requirements.txt file then create the requirements.in. This will insure that the package installed in the virtual environment and Docker image.

 ```
 pip-compile --output-file requirements.txt requirements.in
 ```
__________________________________________________________________

## Pegasus workflow on the Open Science Grid


Run interactively with the Singularity container on the OSG  
```bash
[agladstein@login02 ~]$ singularity shell --home $PWD:/srv --pwd /srv /cvmfs/singularity.opensciencegrid.org/agladstein/simprily\:latest
Singularity: Invoking an interactive shell within container...

$ bash
agladstein@login02:~$ export PATH=/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin
agladstein@login02:~$ python /app/simprily.py examples/eg2/Param_file_eg2.txt examples/eg2/model_file_eg2.csv 2 out_dir
```

### Monitoring and Debugging

To find the run times of the executable:
```
pegasus-statistics -s all
```
Then, look at `Transformation statistics`.

### Submit a workflow

All components of the Pegasus workflow are located in the directory 
`pegasus_workflow`.

Start the workfow by running `submit` on the command line from the `pegasus_workflow` directory.
There are 3 required arguments and 2 optional arguments
```bash
./submit -p PARAM -m MODEL -j NUM [-g MAP] [-a ARRAY]
```
e.g. (No pseudo array and no recombination map) 
```bash
./submit -p ../examples/eg2/param_file_eg2.txt -m ../examples/eg2/model_file_eg2.csv -j 10
```
e.g. (include pseudo array, but no recombination map) 
```bash
./submit -p ../examples/eg2/param_file_eg2_asc.txt -m ../examples/eg2/model_file_eg2_asc.csv -j 10 -a ../array_template/ill_650_test.bed 
```
e.g. (recombination map, but no pseudo array) 
```bash
./submit -p ../examples/eg2/param_file_eg2.txt -m ../examples/eg2/model_file_eg2.csv -j 10 -g ../genetic_map_b37/genetic_map_GRCh37_chr1.txt.macshs
```
e.g. (include pseudo array, and recombination map) 
```bash
./submit -p ../examples/eg2/param_file_eg2_asc.txt -m ../examples/eg2/model_file_eg2_asc.csv -j 10 -a ../array_template/ill_650_test.bed -g ../genetic_map_b37/genetic_map_GRCh37_chr1.txt.macshs
```

##### Required 
`-p PARAM` = The location of the parameter file  
`-m MODEL` = The location of the model file  
`-j NUM` = The number of jobs to run. The `ID` will go from 1 to `NUM`.
 
##### Optional
`-g MAP` = The location of the genetic map file  
`-a ARRAY` = The location of the array template file, in bed form  

*We recommend that all testing be done before submiting workflows to OSG. 
Therefore we do not include the verbose options.
Pegasus provides run information, so we do not include the `profile` option with the OSG workflow.*

### How the Pegasus workflow works

`submit` -> `tools/dax-generator` -> `wrappers/run-sim.sh`

`submit` will run `tools/dax-generator`, which constructs the workflow. The `dax-generator` is the main Pegasus file.
The `dax-generator` creates the HTCondor dag file.
It also tells Pegasus where the local files are and transfers files (from submit host to compute node) so they are available for the job.
It also defines how to handle output files.

`wrappers/run-sim.sh` is the wrapper that runs in the container. It modifies the environment, and runs SimPrily.

__________________________________________________________________

## Recommendations for other HTC workflows
*Coming soon*

__________________________________________________________________

## Calculating summary statistics on real data

### Data format
Real data must be in PLINK .tped file with 0's and 1's.  
Sites in rows, individuals in columns (first 4 columns chr, rsnumber, site_begin, site_end).
The populations must be in the same order as specified in the model file for the simulations.

Put the individuals in teh correct order  
https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink2/data#indiv_sort

```bash
plink --bfile bfile --indiv-sort f sample_order.txt --make-bed --out bfile_ordered
```

To get in the .tped format from .bed .bim .fam with 0's and 1's refer to  
https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink2/formats#tped  

```bash
plink --bfile bfile --recode transpose 01 --output-missing-genotype N --out tfile01
```

### Usage

`real_data_ss.py` takes 5 arguments:  
1. `model_file`
2. `param_file`
3. `output_dir`
4. `genome_file`
5. `array_file`

e.g.  
```bash
python real_data_ss.py examples/eg1/model_file_eg1.csv examples/eg1/param_file_eg1.txt out_dir ~/data/HapMap_example/test_10_YRI_CEU_CHB.tped ~/data/HapMap_example/test_10_YRI_CEU_CHB_KHV_hg18_ill_650.tped
```

__________________________________________________________________

## Common Errors
Number of simulated segregating sites less than number of sites on template array. Increase size of simulated locus.
